README.md, before:

# Stellata

Stellata is a simple PostgreSQL ORM for Python 3.

## Connecting

To connect to a database on the default host/port with a threaded connection pool of size 10:

    import stellata.database

    db = stellata.database.initialize(
        name='database',
        user='user',
        password='password',
        host='localhost',
        port=5432,
        pool_size=10
    )

## Defining Models

A user model might look something like this:

    import stellata.fields
    import stellata.model

    class User(stellata.model.Model):
        __table__ = 'users'

        id = stellata.fields.UUID(null=False)
        active = stellata.fields.Integer(default=1)
        name = stellata.fields.Text(null=False)
        hash = stellata.fields.Varchar(length=255)
        email = stellata.fields.Text()
        dt = stellata.fields.Timestamp(null=False)

The `__table__` property is the name of the corresponding table in the PostgreSQL database. Each property corresponds to a column, and the classes in `stellata.fields` are used to define the column types.

### Field Types

* BigInteger
* Boolean
* Integer
* Numeric
* Text
* Timestamp
* UUID
* Varchar

### Relations

Like any good ORM, Stellata supports relations among models. Here are two related models, `A` and `B`:

    import stellata.model
    import stellata.fields
    import stellata.relations

    class A(stellata.model.Model):
        __table__ = 'a'

        id = stellata.fields.UUID()
        foo = stellata.fields.Text()
        bar = stellata.fields.Integer(default=0, null=False)

        b = stellata.relations.HasMany(lambda: B.A_id, lambda: A)

    class B(stellata.model.Model):
        __table__ = 'b'

        id = stellata.fields.UUID()
        a_id = stellata.fields.UUID()
        bar = stellata.fields.Integer(null=False)

        a = stellata.relations.BelongsTo(lambda: B.a_id, lambda: A)

### Indexes

Indexes make your queries go fast. Let's add a couple indexes to our table:

    import stellata.model
    import stellata.fields
    import stellata.index
    import stellata.relations

    class A(stellata.model.Model):
        __table__ = 'a'

        id = stellata.fields.UUID()
        foo = stellata.fields.Text()
        bar = stellata.fields.Integer(default=0, null=False)

        b = stellata.relations.HasMany(lambda: B.A_id, lambda: A)

        primary_key = stellata.index.PrimaryKey(lambda: A.id)
        foo_index = stellata.index.Index(lambda: A.foo, unique=True)

## Migration

Once you've defined your models, you can sync them with your database by performing a migration.

    stellata.schema.migrate(db, execute=True)

Here, `db` is the handle returned by the `stellata.database.initialize` call. If you'd like to do a dry run, without actually executing any queries, do:

    stellata.schema.migrate(db)

In both cases, this function will return a list of queries needed for the migration.

### Resetting

In some development scripts, you might want to clean your database. If you so desire, you can do this:

    stellata.schema.drop_tables_and_lose_all_data(db, execute=True)

As its name suggests, this function is very destructive, so don't do this on a production database.

## CRUD Operations

Finally, let's walk through how to use Stellata to query your database.

### Create

Let's create a new instance of `A`.

    a = A.create(A(foo='bar', bar=5))
    a.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca'
    a.foo == 'bar'
    a.bar == 4

Or, if we want to create in bulk:

    result = A.create([
        A(foo='bar', bar=6),
        A(foo='baz', bar=7)
    ])

    len(result) == 2

If you created a unique index on some fields, you can take advantage of the PostgreSQL ON CONFLICT feature:

    A.create(A(foo='baz', bar=9), unique=(A.foo,))

Now, if there's already a row with `foo` having a value of `baz`, then the `bar` column will be updated to have a value of `9`, rather than creating a new row.

### Read

To read from the database, we'll want to use the `where` method. Let's get the instance of `A` we created before:

    a = A.where(A.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca').get()
    a.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca'

Jeez Rick, what's that syntax? We're using operator overloading, Morty. What else can we do?

    A.where(A.bar < 5).get()
    A.where(A.bar > 1).get()
    A.where(A.id << ['2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca', '31be0c81-f5ee-49b9-a624-356402427f76']).get()

That last one is a where in query, in case that wasn't burp obvious. We can also use AND and OR in our queries like so:

    A.where((A.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca') | (A.bar < 5)).get()
    A.where((A.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca') & (A.bar > 1)).get()

Finally, we can use those relations we set up earlier with joins. Let's say we create the following:

    a = A.create(A(foo='bar', bar=5))
    a.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca'
    b = B.create([
        B(a_id='2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca', qux=3)
        B(a_id='2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca', qux=5)
    ])


Now, we can do this:

    a = A.join(A.b).where(A.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca').get()
    a.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca'
    len(a.b) == 2
    a.b[0].qux == 3
    a.b[1].qux == 5

Or, the other way:

    b = B.join(B.a).where(B.qux << [3, 5]).get()
    len(b) == 2
    b[0].qux == 3
    b[0].a.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca'
    b[1].qux == 5
    b[1].a.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca'

By default, joins will be executed via multiple SELECT queries. If you'd prefer to do a JOIN instead, just do this:

    a = A.join_with('join').join(A.b).where(A.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca').get()

The result is the same as before, but the underlying query was different. Which method you use is entirely up to you, and may vary with different queries.

### Update

As you might expect, update queries combine the syntax for creating and reading:

    A.where(A.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca').update(A(bar=7))

### Delete

This one is easy now.

    A.where(id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca').delete()

Commit message:

add support for limits
introduce limit expression to limit query results. fix issue with module
import order.

README.md, after:

# Stellata

Stellata is a simple PostgreSQL ORM for Python 3.

## Connecting

To connect to a database on the default host/port with a threaded connection pool of size 10:

    import stellata.database

    db = stellata.database.initialize(
        name='database',
        user='user',
        password='password',
        host='localhost',
        port=5432,
        pool_size=10
    )

## Defining Models

A user model might look something like this:

    import stellata.fields
    import stellata.model

    class User(stellata.model.Model):
        __table__ = 'users'

        id = stellata.fields.UUID(null=False)
        active = stellata.fields.Integer(default=1)
        name = stellata.fields.Text(null=False)
        hash = stellata.fields.Varchar(length=255)
        email = stellata.fields.Text()
        dt = stellata.fields.Timestamp(null=False)

The `__table__` property is the name of the corresponding table in the PostgreSQL database. Each property corresponds to a column, and the classes in `stellata.fields` are used to define the column types.

### Field Types

* BigInteger
* Boolean
* Integer
* Numeric
* Text
* Timestamp
* UUID
* Varchar

### Relations

Like any good ORM, Stellata supports relations among models. Here are two related models, `A` and `B`:

    import stellata.model
    import stellata.fields
    import stellata.relations

    class A(stellata.model.Model):
        __table__ = 'a'

        id = stellata.fields.UUID()
        foo = stellata.fields.Text()
        bar = stellata.fields.Integer(default=0, null=False)

        b = stellata.relations.HasMany(lambda: B.A_id, lambda: A)

    class B(stellata.model.Model):
        __table__ = 'b'

        id = stellata.fields.UUID()
        a_id = stellata.fields.UUID()
        bar = stellata.fields.Integer(null=False)

        a = stellata.relations.BelongsTo(lambda: B.a_id, lambda: A)

### Indexes

Indexes make your queries go fast. Let's add a couple indexes to our table:

    import stellata.model
    import stellata.fields
    import stellata.index
    import stellata.relations

    class A(stellata.model.Model):
        __table__ = 'a'

        id = stellata.fields.UUID()
        foo = stellata.fields.Text()
        bar = stellata.fields.Integer(default=0, null=False)

        b = stellata.relations.HasMany(lambda: B.A_id, lambda: A)

        primary_key = stellata.index.PrimaryKey(lambda: A.id)
        foo_index = stellata.index.Index(lambda: A.foo, unique=True)

## Migration

Once you've defined your models, you can sync them with your database by performing a migration.

    stellata.schema.migrate(db, execute=True)

Here, `db` is the handle returned by the `stellata.database.initialize` call. If you'd like to do a dry run, without actually executing any queries, do:

    stellata.schema.migrate(db)

In both cases, this function will return a list of queries needed for the migration.

### Resetting

In some development scripts, you might want to clean your database. If you so desire, you can do this:

    stellata.schema.drop_tables_and_lose_all_data(db, execute=True)

As its name suggests, this function is very destructive, so don't do this on a production database.

## CRUD Operations

Finally, let's walk through how to use Stellata to query your database.

### Create

Let's create a new instance of `A`.

    a = A.create(A(foo='bar', bar=5))
    a.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca'
    a.foo == 'bar'
    a.bar == 4

Or, if we want to create in bulk:

    result = A.create([
        A(foo='bar', bar=6),
        A(foo='baz', bar=7)
    ])

    len(result) == 2

If you created a unique index on some fields, you can take advantage of the PostgreSQL ON CONFLICT feature:

    A.create(A(foo='baz', bar=9), unique=(A.foo,))

Now, if there's already a row with `foo` having a value of `baz`, then the `bar` column will be updated to have a value of `9`, rather than creating a new row.

### Read

To read from the database, we'll want to use the `where` method. Let's get the instance of `A` we created before:

    a = A.where(A.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca').get()
    a.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca'

Jeez Rick, what's that syntax? We're using operator overloading, Morty. What else can we do?

    A.where(A.bar < 5).get()
    A.where(A.bar > 1).get()
    A.where(A.id << ['2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca', '31be0c81-f5ee-49b9-a624-356402427f76']).get()

That last one is a where in query, in case that wasn't—burp—obvious. We can also use AND and OR in our queries like so:

    A.where((A.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca') | (A.bar < 5)).get()
    A.where((A.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca') & (A.bar > 1)).get()

Other bells and whistles:

    A.where(A.bar < 5).order(A.bar, 'asc').limit(5).get()

Finally, we can use those relations we set up earlier with joins. Let's say we create the following:

    a = A.create(A(foo='bar', bar=5))
    a.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca'
    b = B.create([
        B(a_id='2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca', qux=3)
        B(a_id='2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca', qux=5)
    ])

Now, we can do this:

    a = A.join(A.b).where(A.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca').get()
    a.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca'
    len(a.b) == 2
    a.b[0].qux == 3
    a.b[1].qux == 5

Or, the other way:

    b = B.join(B.a).where(B.qux << [3, 5]).get()
    len(b) == 2
    b[0].qux == 3
    b[0].a.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca'
    b[1].qux == 5
    b[1].a.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca'

By default, joins will be executed via multiple SELECT queries. If you'd prefer to do a JOIN instead, just do this:

    a = A.join_with('join').join(A.b).where(A.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca').get()

The result is the same as before, but the underlying query was different. Which method you use is entirely up to you, and may vary with different queries.

### Update

As you might expect, update queries combine the syntax for creating and reading:

    A.where(A.id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca').update(A(bar=7))

### Delete

This one is easy now.

    A.where(id == '2a12f545-c587-4b99-8fd2-57e79f7c8bca').delete()
